---
layout: post
slug: privacy-in-technology
title: "Privacy in technology"
excerpt: "Privacy has many facets. The issue of privacy bothers us in today's ever-more connected world because we do not control its manifestations. Let's look at why and how privacy manifests in the technology around us."
tags:
- thoughts
- technology
- privacy
---

Privacy has many facets. The issue of privacy bothers us in today's ever-more connected world because we do not control its manifestations. We see elaborate privacy policies, bills, laws and rights in place. Yet, it is difficult to build a right privacy-aware system for everyone given that the concept of privacy is highly subjective and is open to interpretations.

Before we dig deeper, let us take a look at a few manifestations of privacy in the domain of data transmission. Consider this:

> When we want to share information with others using technology, we are dependent on the technology we use to respect whether the information is delivered only to the intended recipient(s) or whether it is shared intentionally or unintentionally with other non-intended recipients.

If we ask under which conditions can we call such a system as "privacy aware", there can be multiple interpretations. There would be a set that would say that as long as their message reaches their recipients, they do not bother about other issues. Let us keep this set of people aside for a while and consider the other possibilities we may have. For instance, some others would say that as long as no one else (governments, corporations, parents, spouses, Sauron) sees it and it reaches the destination, it is fine. By those terms, when the information is delivered only to the intended recipients, we often call it a "privacy-aware" system. When the information is shared with non-intended recipients, we term it as a "privacy breach". Some others would argue that this is not good enough. If the system stores the data that they had sent through that system, irrespective of whether the system makes use of that stored data now or in future, it violates privacy. An edge group would further add that as long as such a system stores data beyond the duration of the actual transmission, it is a violation of privacy, regardless of the intention.

That is a lot of opinions to take in, and this does not even represent the full spectrum of opinions. We see three patterns emerging:

- One size does not fit all
- Many issues can get intertwined once you dig deeper; the way data usage became a concern in data transmission in the scenario above.
- People exchange privacy with comfort to certain degrees, often based on the amount of facilities offered.

I'll leave the solution for a later exercise. For now, let us focus on the issues at hand and try to isolate them.

## When does privacy manifest?

That instinctive uncomfortable feeling we get when someone watches us behind our back perhaps ties back to our survival traits. In an environment where we don't have to worry about a predator pouncing on us, our instincts evolve to try to figure out who may be watching us, tracking our moves. The demand for privacy rises as our base reaction to protect information of our personal state from such external entities. That is, we like to able to define the terms when we would prefer to remain unobserved by others. This can be for anything &mdash; from trying to focus on a problem at hand, having secret conversations, to going on a trip without someone tracking us. The ask changes from "Don't eat me" to "Leave me alone". We still remain wary of the predator; except the nature of the predator changes and becomes increasingly harder to uncover.

In technology, the manifestation of privacy appears whenever there is a component of user data involved. We can loosely describe "user data" as any information either actively produced by a user or passively generated by the actions and interactions of the user. User data can be either anonymous or identifiable. Some of these manifestations are apparent and easy to pin-point, some are veiled and seem apparently harmless.

For example, if someone gets unauthorized access to our mobile phones and secretly listens to our conversations, it can be easily pin-pointed as a privacy issue. Yet, when we are under surveillance in public places, it tends to seem alright. In either cases, these systems can access information about us in the form of audio conversations or audio/video feed showing our actions. Both these systems access what I described above as "user data". Hence, both of these should raise privacy concerns. But, we seem to be less perturbed about public surveillance systems. Why? Maybe because we don't perceive such observation as threats. Some of us don't mind being under surveillance, some of us are uncomfortable about it and some of us get downright upset about it.

The point to note here is that even when user data is involved and crucial privacy issues arise, the perception of how much privacy is good privacy remains very much subjective.

### Why is privacy optional today?

The nature of the technology we see around ourselves today almost always poses a trade-off between sharing user data and facilities offered. You cannot have your intelligent calendar auto-record travel dates as calendar events without reading and understanding your emails. You cannot browse an item on an e-commerce website without every other website showing you targeted advertisements urging you to buy similar products from them.

## Does security guarantee privacy?

## Blurring the boundaries: Privacy in a connected world
